README.md, before:

# Nelson Muntz Plugin for OpenCode

[![CI](https://github.com/whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz)

Plan-based iterative development loops for [OpenCode](https://opencode.ai). Create structured plans, execute tasks automatically, and commit progress as you go.

> **Why "Nelson Muntz"?** Named after the Simpsons character. Inspired by the [Ralph Wiggum](https://ghuntley.com/ralph/) technique. Ha-ha!

## What is Nelson?

Nelson is a development plugin that combines structured planning with automated execution. Create a plan with tasks, then let Nelson work through them one by one, committing progress after each task.

The plugin listens for OpenCode's `session.idle` event to continue work automatically, creating a feedback loop where the AI iteratively builds on its own work.

![Nelson Muntz OpenCode Plugin](./assets/nelson.png)

### Core Workflow

```
# Create a plan through conversation:
nm-plan name="my-api"

# Work through tasks automatically:
nm-start

# Loop works through tasks one by one
# Stops when: all tasks marked [x] OR maxIterations reached
```

## Installation

### From npm (recommended for end users)

Add the plugin to your `opencode.json`:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://opencode.ai/config.json",
  "plugin": ["@whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz"]
}
```

OpenCode will automatically install it on startup.

### From source (for development)

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz.git
cd opencode-nelson-muntz

# Install dependencies
just install

# Link to OpenCode for local development
just link-local    # Global: ~/.config/opencode/plugin/
just link-project  # Project: .opencode/plugin/
```

## Usage

Nelson's tools are designed to complement OpenCode's built-in Plan and Code modes:

- **OpenCode Plan mode** - For thinking, designing, and conversation without making changes
- **OpenCode Build mode** - For executing tasks and writing code

Nelson's `nm-plan` and `nm-start` tools align with this workflow:

| OpenCode Mode | Nelson Tool | What Happens                                |
| ------------- | ----------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| Plan mode     | `nm-plan`   | Design and refine your plan in conversation |
| Build mode    | `nm-start`  | Execute tasks, write code, commit changes   |

### Plan Mode

Use OpenCode's Plan mode with `nm-plan` to create and refine your plan _before_ any code is written. This is an iterative conversation where you shape the plan until you're happy with it.

1. **Start planning** - Ask the AI to create a plan:

   ```
   You: "Create a plan for building a REST API for todos"
   ```

   The AI calls `nm-plan` and generates a draft plan, showing it to you in the conversation. **No file is written yet.**

2. **Iterate on the plan** - Refine it through conversation:

   ```
   You: "Add a task for authentication"
   You: "Split the database task into schema design and migrations"
   You: "Remove the Docker task, I'll handle that manually"
   You: "Reorder so database setup comes before the API endpoints"
   ```

   The AI updates the plan and shows you each revision.

   > **Task ordering matters!** Tasks are executed top-to-bottom, so ensure foundational work (setup, data models, infrastructure) comes before features that depend on it. Get the order right during planning - it's easier than reordering later.

3. **Confirm and save** - When you're satisfied, confirm it:

   ```
   You: "Looks good, save it"
   ```

   The AI calls `nm-plan` with `action='save'` to write the plan file to `.opencode/plans/rest-api.md`.

### Build Mode

Once your plan is saved, switch to OpenCode's Build mode and use `nm-start` to execute tasks. The AI reads the plan file and works through each task.

1. **Start the loop** - Execute all pending tasks automatically:

   ```
   You: "Use nm-start rest-api"
   ```

   Nelson works through each task, marking them complete and creating git commits.

2. **Or run tasks one at a time** - For more control:

   ```
   You: "Use nm-tasks"          # List tasks and their status
   You: "Use nm-task 2"         # Execute task #2 only
   ```

### Available Tools

When the plugin is installed you can ask opencode for all "nm-\* tasks" and it will list them.

| Tool          | Description                                       |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `nm-plan`     | Create or view a PLAN.md file                     |
| `nm-plans`    | List all available plan files                     |
| `nm-start`    | Start loop from PLAN.md (auto-commits per task)   |
| `nm-tasks`    | List all tasks from the plan                      |
| `nm-task`     | Execute a single task (auto-completes, no commit) |
| `nm-complete` | Manually mark a task complete (rarely needed)     |

### Tool Parameters

#### nm-start

| Parameter       | Type   | Required | Description                                                                      |
| --------------- | ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `name`          | string | No       | Plan name (e.g., 'rest-api' or 'My API') - resolves to .opencode/plans/{slug}.md |
| `file`          | string | No       | Explicit plan file path (default: .opencode/plans/PLAN.md)                       |
| `maxIterations` | number | No       | Safety limit on iterations (default: 0 = unlimited). Rarely needed.              |

You can specify the plan by name or file path. If both are provided, `name` takes precedence.

#### nm-plan

| Parameter     | Type   | Required | Description                                                        |
| ------------- | ------ | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `action`      | string | No       | 'create', 'view', or 'save' (default: create)                      |
| `name`        | string | No       | Plan name - used to generate filename (e.g., 'My API' → my-api.md) |
| `description` | string | No       | Project description (also used for filename if no name)            |
| `file`        | string | No       | Explicit file path (overrides auto-generated name)                 |
| `content`     | string | No       | Plan content to save (required when action='save')                 |

Filename generation priority:

1. Explicit `file` parameter if provided
2. Slugified `name` parameter
3. Slugified `description` parameter
4. Falls back to "plan.md"

All plans are stored in `.opencode/plans/` by default.

#### nm-task

| Parameter | Type   | Required | Description                                                                      |
| --------- | ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `task`    | string | Yes      | Task number (1, 2, 3...) or name                                                 |
| `name`    | string | No       | Plan name (e.g., 'rest-api' or 'My API') - resolves to .opencode/plans/{slug}.md |
| `file`    | string | No       | Explicit plan file path (default: .opencode/plans/PLAN.md)                       |

#### nm-tasks

| Parameter | Type   | Required | Description                                                                      |
| --------- | ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `name`    | string | No       | Plan name (e.g., 'rest-api' or 'My API') - resolves to .opencode/plans/{slug}.md |
| `file`    | string | No       | Explicit plan file path (default: .opencode/plans/PLAN.md)                       |

#### nm-complete

| Parameter | Type   | Required | Description                                                                      |
| --------- | ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `task`    | string | Yes      | Task number (1, 2, 3...) or name                                                 |
| `name`    | string | No       | Plan name (e.g., 'rest-api' or 'My API') - resolves to .opencode/plans/{slug}.md |
| `file`    | string | No       | Explicit plan file path (default: .opencode/plans/PLAN.md)                       |

## Development

### Prerequisites

- [Bun](https://bun.sh) v1.0 or later
- [OpenCode](https://opencode.ai) installed

### Setup

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz.git
cd opencode-nelson-muntz

# Install dependencies
just install

# Type check
just typecheck

# Build for distribution
just build
```

### Tasks

This project uses [just](https://github.com/casey/just) as a command runner. Run `just` with no arguments to see all available tasks.

## Local Files and Folders

Nelson creates files in your project's `.opencode/` directory:

```
.opencode/
├── plans/                      # Your plan files (persistent)
│   ├── my-api.md
│   └── another-project.md
└── nelson-state.local.json     # Loop state (temporary)
```

### File Details

| File/Folder                         | Purpose                                                              | Lifecycle                                                                             |
| ----------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `.opencode/plans/`                  | Stores PLAN.md files with your tasks                                 | Persistent - you create and manage these                                              |
| `.opencode/nelson-state.local.json` | Tracks active loop state (iteration count, current task, session ID) | **Temporary** - created when loop starts, deleted when loop completes or is cancelled |

### Git Recommendations

Add to your `.gitignore`:

```gitignore
# Nelson Muntz plugin state (temporary, local only)
.opencode/nelson-state.local.json
```

Your plan files in `.opencode/plans/` can be committed if you want to share them with your team, or gitignored if they're personal.

## How It Works

1. **Loop Activation**: When you call `nm-start`, the plugin reads PLAN.md and creates a state file at `.opencode/nelson-state.local.json`

2. **Task Execution**: The plugin generates a prompt for the first pending task and sends it to the AI

3. **Session Monitoring**: The plugin listens for the `session.idle` event which fires when the AI finishes its response

4. **Task Completion**: When idle, the plugin marks the current task as `[x]` in PLAN.md and creates a git commit

5. **Loop Continuation**: The plugin finds the next pending task and sends a new prompt. If no pending tasks remain, the loop ends.

## When to Use Nelson

### Good for:

- Multi-step projects with distinct phases
- Greenfield development where you want git commits per task
- Projects where you want to review progress task-by-task

### Not good for:

- One-shot operations that don't benefit from iteration
- Tasks with unclear success criteria
- Production debugging (use targeted debugging instead)

## Learn More

- OpenCode Plugins: https://opencode.ai/docs/plugins/

## License

MIT

Commit message:

docs: Note Claude model compatibility in installation section

README.md, after:

# Nelson Muntz Plugin for OpenCode

[![CI](https://github.com/whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz)

Plan-based iterative development loops for [OpenCode](https://opencode.ai). Create structured plans, execute tasks automatically, and commit progress as you go.

> **Why "Nelson Muntz"?** Named after the Simpsons character. Inspired by the [Ralph Wiggum](https://ghuntley.com/ralph/) technique. Ha-ha!

## What is Nelson?

Nelson is a development plugin that combines structured planning with automated execution. Create a plan with tasks, then let Nelson work through them one by one, committing progress after each task.

The plugin listens for OpenCode's `session.idle` event to continue work automatically, creating a feedback loop where the AI iteratively builds on its own work.

![Nelson Muntz OpenCode Plugin](./assets/nelson.png)

### Core Workflow

```
# Create a plan through conversation:
nm-plan name="my-api"

# Work through tasks automatically:
nm-start

# Loop works through tasks one by one
# Stops when: all tasks marked [x] OR maxIterations reached
```

## Installation

> **Note**: This plugin has been primarily tested with Anthropic models (Claude) and works best with them.

### From npm (recommended for end users)

Add the plugin to your `opencode.json`:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://opencode.ai/config.json",
  "plugin": ["@whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz"]
}
```

OpenCode will automatically install it on startup.

### From source (for development)

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz.git
cd opencode-nelson-muntz

# Install dependencies
just install

# Link to OpenCode for local development
just link-local    # Global: ~/.config/opencode/plugin/
just link-project  # Project: .opencode/plugin/
```

## Usage

Nelson's tools are designed to complement OpenCode's built-in Plan and Code modes:

- **OpenCode Plan mode** - For thinking, designing, and conversation without making changes
- **OpenCode Build mode** - For executing tasks and writing code

Nelson's `nm-plan` and `nm-start` tools align with this workflow:

| OpenCode Mode | Nelson Tool | What Happens                                |
| ------------- | ----------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| Plan mode     | `nm-plan`   | Design and refine your plan in conversation |
| Build mode    | `nm-start`  | Execute tasks, write code, commit changes   |

### Plan Mode

Use OpenCode's Plan mode with `nm-plan` to create and refine your plan _before_ any code is written. This is an iterative conversation where you shape the plan until you're happy with it.

1. **Start planning** - Ask the AI to create a plan:

   ```
   You: "Create a plan for building a REST API for todos"
   ```

   The AI calls `nm-plan` and generates a draft plan, showing it to you in the conversation. **No file is written yet.**

2. **Iterate on the plan** - Refine it through conversation:

   ```
   You: "Add a task for authentication"
   You: "Split the database task into schema design and migrations"
   You: "Remove the Docker task, I'll handle that manually"
   You: "Reorder so database setup comes before the API endpoints"
   ```

   The AI updates the plan and shows you each revision.

   > **Task ordering matters!** Tasks are executed top-to-bottom, so ensure foundational work (setup, data models, infrastructure) comes before features that depend on it. Get the order right during planning - it's easier than reordering later.

3. **Confirm and save** - When you're satisfied, confirm it:

   ```
   You: "Looks good, save it"
   ```

   The AI calls `nm-plan` with `action='save'` to write the plan file to `.opencode/plans/rest-api.md`.

### Build Mode

Once your plan is saved, switch to OpenCode's Build mode and use `nm-start` to execute tasks. The AI reads the plan file and works through each task.

1. **Start the loop** - Execute all pending tasks automatically:

   ```
   You: "Use nm-start rest-api"
   ```

   Nelson works through each task, marking them complete and creating git commits.

2. **Or run tasks one at a time** - For more control:

   ```
   You: "Use nm-tasks"          # List tasks and their status
   You: "Use nm-task 2"         # Execute task #2 only
   ```

### Available Tools

When the plugin is installed you can ask opencode for all "nm-\* tasks" and it will list them.

| Tool          | Description                                       |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `nm-plan`     | Create or view a PLAN.md file                     |
| `nm-plans`    | List all available plan files                     |
| `nm-start`    | Start loop from PLAN.md (auto-commits per task)   |
| `nm-tasks`    | List all tasks from the plan                      |
| `nm-task`     | Execute a single task (auto-completes, no commit) |
| `nm-complete` | Manually mark a task complete (rarely needed)     |

### Tool Parameters

#### nm-start

| Parameter       | Type   | Required | Description                                                                      |
| --------------- | ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `name`          | string | No       | Plan name (e.g., 'rest-api' or 'My API') - resolves to .opencode/plans/{slug}.md |
| `file`          | string | No       | Explicit plan file path (default: .opencode/plans/PLAN.md)                       |
| `maxIterations` | number | No       | Safety limit on iterations (default: 0 = unlimited). Rarely needed.              |

You can specify the plan by name or file path. If both are provided, `name` takes precedence.

#### nm-plan

| Parameter     | Type   | Required | Description                                                        |
| ------------- | ------ | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `action`      | string | No       | 'create', 'view', or 'save' (default: create)                      |
| `name`        | string | No       | Plan name - used to generate filename (e.g., 'My API' → my-api.md) |
| `description` | string | No       | Project description (also used for filename if no name)            |
| `file`        | string | No       | Explicit file path (overrides auto-generated name)                 |
| `content`     | string | No       | Plan content to save (required when action='save')                 |

Filename generation priority:

1. Explicit `file` parameter if provided
2. Slugified `name` parameter
3. Slugified `description` parameter
4. Falls back to "plan.md"

All plans are stored in `.opencode/plans/` by default.

#### nm-task

| Parameter | Type   | Required | Description                                                                      |
| --------- | ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `task`    | string | Yes      | Task number (1, 2, 3...) or name                                                 |
| `name`    | string | No       | Plan name (e.g., 'rest-api' or 'My API') - resolves to .opencode/plans/{slug}.md |
| `file`    | string | No       | Explicit plan file path (default: .opencode/plans/PLAN.md)                       |

#### nm-tasks

| Parameter | Type   | Required | Description                                                                      |
| --------- | ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `name`    | string | No       | Plan name (e.g., 'rest-api' or 'My API') - resolves to .opencode/plans/{slug}.md |
| `file`    | string | No       | Explicit plan file path (default: .opencode/plans/PLAN.md)                       |

#### nm-complete

| Parameter | Type   | Required | Description                                                                      |
| --------- | ------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `task`    | string | Yes      | Task number (1, 2, 3...) or name                                                 |
| `name`    | string | No       | Plan name (e.g., 'rest-api' or 'My API') - resolves to .opencode/plans/{slug}.md |
| `file`    | string | No       | Explicit plan file path (default: .opencode/plans/PLAN.md)                       |

## Development

### Prerequisites

- [Bun](https://bun.sh) v1.0 or later
- [OpenCode](https://opencode.ai) installed

### Setup

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/whomwah/opencode-nelson-muntz.git
cd opencode-nelson-muntz

# Install dependencies
just install

# Type check
just typecheck

# Build for distribution
just build
```

### Tasks

This project uses [just](https://github.com/casey/just) as a command runner. Run `just` with no arguments to see all available tasks.

## Local Files and Folders

Nelson creates files in your project's `.opencode/` directory:

```
.opencode/
├── plans/                      # Your plan files (persistent)
│   ├── my-api.md
│   └── another-project.md
└── nelson-state.local.json     # Loop state (temporary)
```

### File Details

| File/Folder                         | Purpose                                                              | Lifecycle                                                                             |
| ----------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `.opencode/plans/`                  | Stores PLAN.md files with your tasks                                 | Persistent - you create and manage these                                              |
| `.opencode/nelson-state.local.json` | Tracks active loop state (iteration count, current task, session ID) | **Temporary** - created when loop starts, deleted when loop completes or is cancelled |

### Git Recommendations

Add to your `.gitignore`:

```gitignore
# Nelson Muntz plugin state (temporary, local only)
.opencode/nelson-state.local.json
```

Your plan files in `.opencode/plans/` can be committed if you want to share them with your team, or gitignored if they're personal.

## How It Works

1. **Loop Activation**: When you call `nm-start`, the plugin reads PLAN.md and creates a state file at `.opencode/nelson-state.local.json`

2. **Task Execution**: The plugin generates a prompt for the first pending task and sends it to the AI

3. **Session Monitoring**: The plugin listens for the `session.idle` event which fires when the AI finishes its response

4. **Task Completion**: When idle, the plugin marks the current task as `[x]` in PLAN.md and creates a git commit

5. **Loop Continuation**: The plugin finds the next pending task and sends a new prompt. If no pending tasks remain, the loop ends.

## When to Use Nelson

### Good for:

- Multi-step projects with distinct phases
- Greenfield development where you want git commits per task
- Projects where you want to review progress task-by-task

### Not good for:

- One-shot operations that don't benefit from iteration
- Tasks with unclear success criteria
- Production debugging (use targeted debugging instead)

## Learn More

- OpenCode Plugins: https://opencode.ai/docs/plugins/

## License

MIT
